
             DesignSync/VC: the Emacs interface to DesignSync

                         last updated: 2003-12-30
                                     

WHAT IT IS

DesignSync/VC (Version Control) provides access to basic DesignSync
commands from within Emacs.  Without leaving the Emacs user interface, you
can obtain a lock, make local changes, perform a diff, and checkin those
changes.  DesignSync/VC is built on top of the Emacs VC package, so users
who have used CVS within Emacs will be familiar with its operation.


BASIC OPERATIONS

The most common operation by far is vc-next-action (key sequence: C-x v v),
"do the right thing". If you have a locally modified file, for example,
C-x v v checks it in and then reverts the buffer allowing you to continue
editing; if you have an unmanaged file, C-x v v checks it in using 'ci -new'.

Other common operations are:

    Key Sequence   Command 
    ------------   -----------------------
    C-x v v        vc-next-action 
    C-x v =        vc-diff 
    C-x v l        vc-print-log (vhistory) 


HOW TO GET STARTED 

Before you can use DesignSync/VC, you must follow this procedure: 

1. Decide whether you are using the locking work style or the merging work
style.  This is important, for example, when you have a file which is
up-to-date and you type C-x v v. If you are using the locking work style,
the next thing is to get the lock. If you are using the merging work
style, there is nothing to do.

2. Add code to your .emacs file to load DesignSync/VC: 

    ;; Set DesignSync/VC options and load it.
    (setq vc-sync-work-style 'merging) ; 'merging or 'locking
    (setq vc-initial-comment t)        ; require comment for 'ci -new'
    (add-to-list 'load-path "/full/path/to/lisp/directory")
    (load "designsync")


LIMITATIONS 

1. This interface has been tested only with DesignSync 4.0, on Windows
2000 and Linux, using the following versions of Emacs: 

    Gnu Emacs 20.7.1
    Gnu Emacs 21.1.1
    XEmacs 21.4.13 

It does not work with emacs 19. 

2. The dss command must be available in your PATH. 

3. You have to manually define 'vc-sync-work-style as shown above. It
would be conceivable to infer it from the read-only state of the file, or
from the FetchReadOnly user and machine registry settings, but neither is
a sufficient indicator of work style. 

4. Tagging with vc-create-snapshot (C-x v s) uses "dss tag -force" and so 
unconditionally overwrites a previous snapshot. Unfortunately the
vc-create-snapshot function operates a file at a time; if we didn't use
"-force" some files might be successfully tagged before others failed. 

5. A couple features of the generic VC package don't work in
DesignSync/VC, for example, vc-version-other-window.  If you hit one of
these features, you'll get an error like "Sync todo: can't yet checkout to
temp file".


KNOWN PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS 

Problem:  When emacs is loading vc.el, I get the message "Symbol's
          function definition is void: defcustom".
Solution: Gnu Emacs 19 is not supported. Get version 21.
